add doc page on easyconfigs index (#611)
easybuilders/easybuild: docs/Easyconfigs_index.rst

.. _easyconfigs_index:

Using an index to speed up searching for easyconfigs
====================================================

EasyBuild often needs to search for :ref:`easyconfig_files` (or accompanying files like patches),
either based on command line arguments (like the name of an easyconfig file)
or options to the ``eb`` command (like ``--search``, see :ref:`searching_for_easyconfigs`),

> or to resolve dependencies for an particular easyconfig file that was parsed already.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
or to resolve dependencies for a particular easyconfig file that was parsed already.
```

> Searching for easyconfig files or patches make take a while, since it may involve weeding through

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Searching for easyconfig files or patches may take a while, since it can potentially involve weeding through
```

> thousands of files, which may be located on a shared filesystem (where metadata-intensive operations like

Reviewer: ```suggestion
thousands of files that may be located on a shared filesystem (where metadata-intensive operations like
```

file searching can be rather slow).

> If EasyBuild turns out to be rather sluggish when searching for easyconfig files in your setup,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If EasyBuild turns out to be significantly sluggish searching for easyconfig files in your setup,
```

using an *index* file could make a big difference.

.. note:: Support for index files was implemented in EasyBuild version 4.2.0 .

.. contents::
    :depth: 3
    :backlinks: none

.. _easyconfigs_index_create:

Creating an index (``--create-index``)
--------------------------------------

``eb --create-index`` can be used to create an index file for a particular directory
that holds a (large) set of easyconfig files.

> The index file (a hidden file named '``.eb-path-index``') will be created in the specified directory,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The index file (a hidden file named ``.eb-path-index``) will be created in the specified directory
```

> and will contain a list of (relative) paths of all files in that directory,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and will contain a list of (relative) paths to all files in that directory,
```

> along with some metadata: the time at which the index file has created,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
along with some metadata: the time at which the index file has created
```

and a timestamp that indicates how long the index is considered to be valid (see :ref:`easyconfigs_index_max_age`).

.. note::
  Make sure to create an index for the correct path.

>   When searching for easyconfig files, EasyBuild will *not* recurse into subdirectories of the locations

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  The search for easyconfig files performed by EasyBuild will *not* recurse into subdirectories of the locations
```

>   it considers (see :ref:`robot_search_path`), other than the ones it considers based on the name of the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  it considers (see :ref:`robot_search_path`), other than than those with a name matching the
```

  software for which it is trying to find an easyconfig file (like ``t/TensorFlow/`` when searching for an
  easyconfig file for ``TensorFlow``).

>   Hence, if the directory where your easyconfig files are housed in has an ``easybuild/easyconfigs`` subdirectory

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Hence, if the directory housing your easyconfig files has an ``easybuild/easyconfigs`` subdirectory
```

  # created at: 2020-04-13 14:19:57.008981
  # valid until: 2020-04-20 14:19:57.008981
  a/Arrow/Arrow-0.16.0-intel-2019b-Python-3.7.4.eb
  b/Boost/Boost-1.71.0-gompi-2019b.eb
  b/bokeh/bokeh-1.4.0-foss-2019b-Python-3.7.4.eb

.. note::
  The "``found valid index ...``" message being printed occurs because EasyBuild tries to load the index file
  right after creating it, as a sanity check.

.. _easyconfigs_index_update:

Updating an existing index (``--create-index --force``)
-------------------------------------------------------

To update an existing index, you can use ``--create-index --force``.

Without using ``--force``, EasyBuild will refuse to overwrite the existing index file::

  $ eb --create-index $HOME/easybuild-easyconfigs/easybuild/easyconfigs
  == temporary log file in case of crash /tmp/eb-tUu6_w/easybuild-SKBnVO.log
  Creating index for /home/example/easybuild-easyconfigs/easybuild/easyconfigs...
  ERROR: File exists, not overwriting it without --force: /home/example/easybuild-easyconfigs/easybuild/easyconfigs/.eb-path-index

.. _easyconfigs_index_use:

Using index files
-----------------

> EasyBuild will automatically pick up & use an index file if it runs into it when searching for

Reviewer: ```suggestion
EasyBuild will automatically pick up and use any index file that it runs into while searching for
```

> easyconfig files or patches, rather than walking the directory to check whether the file it's looking for

Reviewer: ```suggestion
easyconfig files or patches. Once an index file is found, it will preferred over walking through the directory tree to find the target easyconfig,
```

> is available in that directory, which is likely to significantly speed up the search operation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
which is likely to significantly speed up the search operation.
```

When a (valid) index file is found for a particular path, a message will be printed mentioning "``found valid index
for...``"::

  $ eb --search TensorFlow-2.1.0-foss-2019b
  == found valid index for /home/example/easybuild-easyconfigs/easybuild/easyconfigs, so using it...
 * /home/example/easybuild-easyconfigs/easybuild/easyconfigs/t/TensorFlow/TensorFlow-2.1.0-foss-2019b-Python-3.7.4.eb

.. _easyconfigs_index_ignore:

Ignoring indices (``--ignore-index``)
-------------------------------------

One potential issue with having an index in place is that it may get outdated:
new files may have been added to the directory since the index was created or last updated.

> To deal with this, you can instruct EasyBuild to ignore any existing indices using the ``--ignore-index``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If updating the indexes is not an option (see :ref:`easyconfigs_index_update`), you can instruct EasyBuild to ignore any existing indices using the ``--ignore-index``
```

configuration option.

> The only downside of this is that searching for easyconfig files may be significantly slower.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The only downside of this option is that searching for easyconfig files may be significantly slower.
```

Any existing index files are left untouched (they will *not* be updated or removed).

.. _easyconfigs_index_max_age:

Controlling how long the index is valid (``--index-max-age``)
-------------------------------------------------------------

> When creating an index file, you can specify how long the index should be considered valid.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
New index files can be created specifying how long they should be considered valid.
```

> Using the ``--index-max-age`` configuration option, you can specify how longer after the creating time

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using the ``--index-max-age`` configuration option, you can specify how much longer after the creation time
```

the index remains valid (in seconds).

By default, EasyBuild will consider index files to remain valid for 1 week (7 * 24 * 60 * 60  = 604,800 seconds).

> To create an index that *always* remains (never expires), use zero (``0``) as value for ``--index-max-age``::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To create an index that *always* remains valid (never expires), use zero (``0``) as value for ``--index-max-age``::
```

either based on command line arguments (like the name of an easyconfig file)
or options to the ``eb`` command (like ``--search``, see :ref:`searching_for_easyconfigs`),
or to resolve dependencies for a particular easyconfig file that was parsed already.

Searching for easyconfig files or patches may take a while, since it can potentially involve weeding through
thousands of files, which may be located on a shared filesystem (where metadata-intensive operations like
file searching can be rather slow).

If EasyBuild turns out to be sluggish when searching for easyconfig files in your setup,
using an *index* file could make a big difference.

.. note:: Support for index files was implemented in EasyBuild version 4.2.0 .

.. contents::
    :depth: 3
    :backlinks: none

.. _easyconfigs_index_create:

Creating an index (``--create-index``)
--------------------------------------

``eb --create-index`` can be used to create an index file for a particular directory
that holds a (large) set of easyconfig files.

The index file (a hidden file named ``.eb-path-index``) will be created in the specified directory.
It will contain a list of (relative) paths for all files in that directory,

> along with some metadata: the time at which the index file has created

Reviewer: ```suggestion
along with some metadata: the time at which the index file was created
```

Any existing index files are left untouched (they will *not* be updated or removed).

.. _easyconfigs_index_max_age:

Controlling how long the index is valid (``--index-max-age``)
-------------------------------------------------------------

When creating an index file, you can specify how long the index should be considered valid.

Using the ``--index-max-age`` configuration option, you can specify how long after the creation time
the index remains valid (in seconds).

By default, EasyBuild will consider index files to remain valid for 1 week (7 * 24 * 60 * 60  = 604,800 seconds).

To create an index that *always* remains valid (never expires), use zero (``0``) as value for ``--index-max-age``::

  $ eb --create-index --index-max-age=0 $HOME/easybuild-easyconfigs/easybuild/easyconfigs

  $ head -n 2 $HOME/easybuild-easyconfigs/easybuild/easyconfigs/.eb-path-index
  # created at: 2020-04-13 15:10:07.173191
  # valid until: 9999-12-31 23:59:59.999999

.. note:: Trust us here, December 31st 9999 is the end of times. Better get prepared.

.. _easyconfigs_index_release:

Index included with EasyBuild releases
--------------------------------------

> Each EasyBuild release (since EasyBuild v4.2.0) comes with a index file for the easyconfig (and patch) files

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each EasyBuild release (since EasyBuild v4.2.0) comes with an index file for the easyconfig (and patch) files
```

that are included with that release.

Hence, you only need to use ``--create-index`` to create/update the index file for any additional directories
with easyconfig files you may have on the side (and only if searching those easyconfig files is rather slow).

.. _easyconfigs_index_should_use:

Should I create an index?
-------------------------

Whether or not you should create an index file for your directories housing additional easyconfig files depends on a number of factors, including:

> * how often files or added and/or removed in those directories, since files listed in the index are assumed to be there and any files not included in the index will be overlooked by EasyBuild when it's searching for files;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* how often files are added and/or removed in those directories, since files listed in the index are assumed to be there and any files not included in the index will be overlooked by EasyBuild when it's searching for files;
```
